add "Introduction to ggml" (#2279)
huggingface/blog: introduction-to-ggml.md

---
title: "Introduction to ggml" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/introduction-to-ggml/cover.jpg
authors:
- user: ngxson
- user: ggerganov

>   guest: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  guest: true
  org: ggml-org
```

This will add a logo under the name, see for example https://huggingface.co/blog/winning-aimo-progress-prize :)

Author: @ggerganov I will also add @slaren as co-author. Can you also add him to the ggml-org? Thanks!

Reviewer: cc @Vaibhavs10, as I'm not a member yet

---

> # Introduction to ggml

Reviewer: I'd maybe add a short sentence at the end of the intro stating that this post is about getting started as a ggml developer, not about higher-level tasks such as LLM inference with llama.cpp.

Author: yup I agree, added in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/dfc614dd78c8e9d506af50e4bb2f75809773a89d

Over time, ggml has gained popularity alongside other projects like [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) and [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp). Many other projects also use ggml under the hood to enable on-device LLM, including [ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama), [jan](https://github.com/janhq/jan), [LM Studio](https://github.com/lmstudio-ai).

The main reasons people choose to use ggml over other libraries are:

1. **Minimalism**: The core library is self-contained in less than 5 files. While you may want to include additional files for GPU support, it's optional.
2. **Easy compilation**: You don't need fancy build tools. Without GPU support, you only need GCC or Clang!
3. **Lightweight**: The compiled binary size is less than 1MB, which is tiny compared to PyTorch (which usually takes hundreds of MB).
4. **Good compatibility**: It supports many types of hardware, including x86_64, ARM, Apple Silicon, CUDA, etc.
5. **Support for quantized tensors**: Tensors can be quantized to save memory space (similar to JPEG compression) without affecting computation performance (it's even faster than F32).

> 6. **Extremely memory efficient**: This is both an advantage and a disadvantage. Overhead for storing tensors and performing computations is minimal.

Author: That's a tough question  👀

> 6. **Extremely memory efficient**: This is both an advantage and a disadvantage. Overhead for storing tensors and performing computations is minimal.

Author: I added it in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/95e817d5602cf36eedc077dda987c76ee73ec3ed

> # Terminology and concepts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Terminology and concepts
```

There should be a single level-1 heading with the post's title. A simple TOC UI is auto-generated when that's the case.

Reviewer: Also, what do you think about moving this section right after `Getting started`? The flow would be to compile and see a simple example, tell the user we are going to replicate it, but before doing it we introduce some terminology about the programming model.

Author: make sense, I moved it --> https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/dfc614dd78c8e9d506af50e4bb2f75809773a89d

- [ggml_context](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml.c#L1792): A "container" that holds data of allocated tensors. Memory must be allocated explicitly.
- [ggml_backend](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L80): Represents a hardware backend. There are many types of backends: CPU (default), CUDA, Metal (Apple Silicon), Vulkan, etc.
- [ggml_backend_buffer_type](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L18): Represents a buffer type. Think of it as a "memory allocator" connected to each `ggml_backend`. For example, if you want to perform calculations on a GPU, you need to allocate memory on the GPU via `buffer_type` (usually abbreviated as `buft`).
- [ggml_backend_buffer](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L52): Represents a buffer allocated by `buffer_type`. Remember: a buffer can hold multiple tensors.

> - [ggml_cgraph](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/include/ggml.h#L652): Represents a computational graph. Think of it as the "order of computation" that will be transferred to the backend.

Author: Corrected in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/dfc614dd78c8e9d506af50e4bb2f75809773a89d

- [ggml_gallocr](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-alloc.c#L354): Represents a memory allocator, used by `ggml_cgraph` to dynamically allocate memory for computation.
- [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend.c#L1048): A backend scheduler that allows using multiple backends simultaneously. For example, if a model is too large, some tensors and operations can be processed on the GPU, while others can be handled by the CPU. This is also useful when working with multiple GPUs.

> # Getting started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started
```

Great, so how do you start?

For simplicity, this guide will show you how to compile ggml on **Ubuntu**. In reality, you can compile ggml on virtually any platform (including Windows, macOS, and BSD).

```sh
# Start by installing build dependencies
# "gdb" is optional, but is recommended
sudo apt install build-essential cmake git gdb

# Then, clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml.git
cd ggml

# Try compiling one of the examples
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target simple-ctx

# Run the example
./build/bin/simple-ctx
```

Expected output:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

> If you see the expected result, that mean we're good to go!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see the expected result, that means we're good to go!
```

> # Simple example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Simple example
```

> In this example, we want to create 2 random matrices, multiply them and get the result. Using `pytorch`, the code looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we want to create 2 random matrices, multiply them and get the result. Using PyTorch, the code looks like this:
```

```py
import torch

# Create two random matrices
matrix1 = torch.rand(3, 4)
matrix2 = torch.rand(4, 2)

# Perform matrix multiplication
result = torch.matmul(matrix1, matrix2)
```

> With ggml, these steps must be done to archive the same result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With ggml, these steps must be done to achieve the same result:
```

1. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor data
2. Create tensors and set data
3. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation
4. Run the computation
5. Retrieve results (output tensors)
6. Free memory and exit

> **NOTE**: In this example, for simplification, we will allocate the tensor data **inside** `ggml_context`. In reality, memory should be allocated in device buffer (we will see in the next section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: In this example, we will allocate the tensor data **inside** the `ggml_context` for simplicity. In practice, memory should be allocated as a device buffer, as we'll see in the next section.
```

Maybe link to the section too.

To get started, let's create a new directory `examples/demo`

```sh
cd ggml # make sure you're in the project root

# create cpp and CMakeLists file
touch examples/demo/demo.cpp
touch examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt
```

> The code for this example is based on [simple-ctx.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/master/examples/simple/simple-ctx.cpp)

Reviewer: Maybe use permalinks here?

    ggml_graph_compute_with_ctx(ctx, gf, n_threads);

    // 5. Retrieve results (output tensors)
    float * result_data = (float *) result->data;
    printf("mul mat (%d x %d) (transposed result):\n[", (int) result->ne[0], (int) result->ne[1]);
    for (int j = 0; j < result->ne[1] /* rows */; j++) {
        if (j > 0) {
            printf("\n");
        }

        for (int i = 0; i < result->ne[0] /* cols */; i++) {
            printf(" %.2f", result_data[j * result->ne[0] + i]);
        }
    }
    printf(" ]\n");

    // 6. Free memory and exit
    ggml_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}
```

For the `examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt`:

```
set(TEST_TARGET demo)
add_executable(${TEST_TARGET} demo)
target_link_libraries(${TEST_TARGET} PRIVATE ggml)
```

Edit the `examples/CMakeLists.txt`, add this line at the end:

```
add_subdirectory(demo)
```

Compile and run it:

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target demo

# Run it
./build/bin/demo
```

Expected result:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

> # Example with backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example with backend
```

"Backend" in ggml refers to a device that can handle tensor operations. Backend can be CPU, CUDA, Vulkan, etc.

> In reality, most programs using ggml will store tensor in backend, even if the backend is CPU. The advantages of this approach are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In reality, most programs using ggml will store tensors in a backend, even if the backend is CPU. The advantages of this approach are:
```

- Developer can re-use the same code for other backend. For example, if the code works with CPU, then you can run it on GPU.
- Tensors for result and intermediate operations are allocated automatically.

When doing a computation or inference with backend, common steps that need to be done are:
1. Initialize `ggml_backend`
2. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor metadata (we **don't need** to allocate tensor data right away)

> 3. Create tensors metadata (only there shapes and data type)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create tensors metadata (only their shapes and data types)
```

    float * result_data = new float[ggml_nelements(result)];
    // because the tensor data is stored in device buffer, we need to copy it back to RAM
    ggml_backend_tensor_get(result, result_data, 0, ggml_nbytes(result));
    printf("mul mat (%d x %d) (transposed result):\n[", (int) result->ne[0], (int) result->ne[1]);
    for (int j = 0; j < result->ne[1] /* rows */; j++) {
        if (j > 0) {
            printf("\n");
        }

        for (int i = 0; i < result->ne[0] /* cols */; i++) {
            printf(" %.2f", result_data[j * result->ne[0] + i]);
        }
    }
    printf(" ]\n");

    // 11. Free memory and exit
    delete[] result_data;
    ggml_free(ctx_cgraph);
    ggml_gallocr_free(allocr);
    ggml_free(ctx);
    ggml_backend_buffer_free(buffer);
    ggml_backend_free(backend);
    return 0;
}
```

Compile and run it, you should get the same result as the last example:

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target demo

# Run it
./build/bin/demo
```

Expected result:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

> # Print the computational graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Printing the computational graph
```

When working with a bigger cgraph, you can print out the graph for debugging.

You can add `ggml_graph_print` to do that:

```cpp
...

// Mark the "result" tensor to be computed
ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result0);

// Print the cgraph
ggml_graph_print(gf);
```

Run it:

```
=== GRAPH ===
n_nodes = 1
 -   0: [     4,     3,     1]          MUL_MAT  
n_leafs = 2
 -   0: [     2,     4]     NONE           leaf_0
 -   1: [     2,     3]     NONE           leaf_1
========================================
```

Additionally, you can draw the cgraph as graphviz dot format:

```cpp
ggml_graph_dump_dot(gf, NULL, "debug.dot");
```

> You can use `dot` command or [online website](https://dreampuf.github.io/GraphvizOnline) to render `debug.dot` into final image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `dot` command or this [online website](https://dreampuf.github.io/GraphvizOnline) to render `debug.dot` into a final image:
```

> ![ggml-debug](assets/introduction-to-ggml/ggml-debug.svg)

Reviewer: Maybe add a short final section on where to go from here.

Author: I added "conclusion" part in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/dfc614dd78c8e9d506af50e4bb2f75809773a89d

Over time, ggml has gained popularity alongside other projects like [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp) and [whisper.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp). Many other projects also use ggml under the hood to enable on-device LLM, including [ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama), [jan](https://github.com/janhq/jan), [LM Studio](https://github.com/lmstudio-ai).

The main reasons people choose to use ggml over other libraries are:

1. **Minimalism**: The core library is self-contained in less than 5 files. While you may want to include additional files for GPU support, it's optional.
2. **Easy compilation**: You don't need fancy build tools. Without GPU support, you only need GCC or Clang!
3. **Lightweight**: The compiled binary size is less than 1MB, which is tiny compared to PyTorch (which usually takes hundreds of MB).
4. **Good compatibility**: It supports many types of hardware, including x86_64, ARM, Apple Silicon, CUDA, etc.
5. **Support for quantized tensors**: Tensors can be quantized to save memory (similar to JPEG compression) and in certain cases to improve performance.

> 6. **Extremely memory efficient**: This is both an advantage and a disadvantage. Overhead for storing tensors and performing computations is minimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Extremely memory efficient**: Overhead for storing tensors and performing computations is minimal.
```

I like the list you added, but then I agree with Georgi: it's not clear how "extremely memory efficient" can be a disadvantage. I'd suggest to remove that comment seeing that the disclaimers are coming immediately after :)

Author: Ah yeah I misunderstood the question of @ggerganov earlier.

The disadvantage would be that users cannot create tensors on-the-fly, because memory need to be allocated in advance. For example, using pytorch, I can run `torch.rand(3, 4)` as many times as I want, but in ggml I need to know how many tensors to be created.

But I'd agree that this is a small details, and up to user to judge if it's an advantage or disadvantage. I will now remove this sentence as @pcuenca suggested.

> However, ggml also comes with some disadvantages that you need to keep in mind when using it (Attention: this list may change in future versions of ggml):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, ggml also comes with some disadvantages that you need to keep in mind when using it (this list may change in future versions of ggml):
```

- Not all tensor operations are supported on all backends. For example, some may work on CPU but won't work on CUDA.

> - Coding may not be straightforward and may require deep knowledge of low-level programming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Development with ggml may not be straightforward and may require deep knowledge of low-level programming.
```

- The project is in active development, so breaking changes are expected.

> In this article, we will focus on the fundamentals of ggml for developers looking to get started with the library. It does not cover higher-level tasks such as LLM inference with llama.cpp, which builds upon ggml. Instead, we'll explore the core concepts and basic usage of ggml to provide a solid foundation for further learning and development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this article, we will focus on the fundamentals of ggml for developers looking to get started with the library. We do not cover higher-level tasks such as LLM inference with llama.cpp, which builds upon ggml. Instead, we'll explore the core concepts and basic usage of ggml to provide a solid foundation for further learning and development.
```

- [ggml_backend_buffer](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L52): Represents a buffer allocated by `buffer_type`. Remember: a buffer can hold the data of multiple tensors.
- [ggml_gallocr](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-alloc.c#L354): Represents a memory allocator, used by `ggml_cgraph` to dynamically allocate memory for computation.
- [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend.c#L1048): A backend scheduler that allows using multiple backends simultaneously. For example, if a model is too large, some tensors and operations can be processed on the GPU, while others can be handled by the CPU. This is also useful when working with multiple GPUs.

## Simple example

> In this example, we want to create 2 random matrices, multiply them and get the result. Using PyTorch, the code looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we'll go through the steps to replicate the code we ran in [Getting Started](#getting-started). We need to create 2 matrices, multiply them and get the result. Using PyTorch, the code looks like this:
```

The ggml result is not random, is it?

Author: No it's not. I initially want to generate random tensors in ggml example, but turns out it makes the code less visible, so I decided to leave that out. I will need to change the pytorch to match that.

```py
import torch

# Create two random matrices
matrix1 = torch.rand(3, 4)
matrix2 = torch.rand(4, 2)

# Perform matrix multiplication
result = torch.matmul(matrix1, matrix2)
```

> With ggml, these steps must be done to achieve the same result:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With ggml, the following steps must be done to achieve the same result:
```

6. Free memory and exit

**NOTE**: In this example, we will allocate the tensor data **inside** the `ggml_context` for simplicity. In practice, memory should be allocated as a device buffer, as we'll see in the next section.

To get started, let's create a new directory `examples/demo`

```sh
cd ggml # make sure you're in the project root

# create cpp and CMakeLists file
touch examples/demo/demo.cpp
touch examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt
```

The code for this example is based on [simple-ctx.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/6c71d5a071d842118fb04c03c4b15116dff09621/examples/simple/simple-ctx.cpp)

Edit `examples/demo/demo.cpp` with the content below:

```cpp
#include "ggml.h"
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    // initialize data of matrices to perform matrix multiplication
    const int rows_A = 4, cols_A = 2;
    float matrix_A[rows_A * cols_A] = {
        2, 8,
        5, 1,
        4, 2,
        8, 6
    };
    const int rows_B = 3, cols_B = 2;
    float matrix_B[rows_B * cols_B] = {
        10, 5,
        9, 9,
        5, 4
    };

    // 1. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor data
    // Calculate the size needed to allocate

>     size_t ctx_size = 0;

Reviewer 2: The snippet does not render probably, shows as comments, maybe add a newline after the comment.

Author: I think it's mostly due to syntax highlighting problem on github. It does render properly when viewing on vscode, so I'm pretty sure that it would be find when showing on final blog.

<img width="810" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c4a3f110-3606-497c-86f0-c0181f634ad5">

Reviewer 2: Perfect!

    memcpy(tensor_b->data, matrix_B, ggml_nbytes(tensor_b));

    // 3. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation
    struct ggml_cgraph * gf = ggml_new_graph(ctx);

    // result = a*b^T
    // Pay attention: ggml_mul_mat(A, B) ==> B will be transposed internally
    // the result is transposed
    struct ggml_tensor * result = ggml_mul_mat(ctx, tensor_a, tensor_b);

    // Mark the "result" tensor to be computed
    ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result);

    // 4. Run the computation
    int n_threads = 1; // Optional: number of threads to perform some operations with multi-threading
    ggml_graph_compute_with_ctx(ctx, gf, n_threads);

    // 5. Retrieve results (output tensors)
    float * result_data = (float *) result->data;
    printf("mul mat (%d x %d) (transposed result):\n[", (int) result->ne[0], (int) result->ne[1]);
    for (int j = 0; j < result->ne[1] /* rows */; j++) {
        if (j > 0) {
            printf("\n");
        }

        for (int i = 0; i < result->ne[0] /* cols */; i++) {
            printf(" %.2f", result_data[j * result->ne[0] + i]);
        }
    }
    printf(" ]\n");

    // 6. Free memory and exit
    ggml_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}
```

> For the `examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write these lines in the `examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt` file you created:
```

```
set(TEST_TARGET demo)
add_executable(${TEST_TARGET} demo)
target_link_libraries(${TEST_TARGET} PRIVATE ggml)
```

> Edit the `examples/CMakeLists.txt`, add this line at the end:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit `examples/CMakeLists.txt`, add this line at the end:
```

```
add_subdirectory(demo)
```

Compile and run it:

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target demo

# Run it
./build/bin/demo
```

Expected result:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

> ## Example with backend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Example with a backend
```

Reviewer 2: or GPU backend

10. Retrieve results (output tensors)
11. Free memory and exit

The code for this example is based on [simple-backend.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/6c71d5a071d842118fb04c03c4b15116dff09621/examples/simple/simple-backend.cpp)

```cpp
#include "ggml.h"
#include "ggml-alloc.h"
#include "ggml-backend.h"
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    // initialize data of matrices to perform matrix multiplication
    const int rows_A = 4, cols_A = 2;
    float matrix_A[rows_A * cols_A] = {
        2, 8,
        5, 1,
        4, 2,
        8, 6
    };
    const int rows_B = 3, cols_B = 2;
    float matrix_B[rows_B * cols_B] = {
        10, 5,
        9, 9,
        5, 4
    };

    // 1. Initialize backend
    ggml_backend_t backend = NULL;
#ifdef GGML_USE_CUDA
    fprintf(stderr, "%s: using CUDA backend\n", __func__);
    backend = ggml_backend_cuda_init(0); // init device 0
    if (!backend) {
        fprintf(stderr, "%s: ggml_backend_cuda_init() failed\n", __func__);
    }
#endif
    // if there aren't GPU Backends fallback to CPU backend
    if (!backend) {
        backend = ggml_backend_cpu_init();
    }

    // Calculate the size needed to allocate

>     size_t ctx_size = 0;

Reviewer 2: same as above, the snippets seem to be getting mixed with the comments

    float * result_data = new float[ggml_nelements(result)];
    // because the tensor data is stored in device buffer, we need to copy it back to RAM
    ggml_backend_tensor_get(result, result_data, 0, ggml_nbytes(result));
    printf("mul mat (%d x %d) (transposed result):\n[", (int) result->ne[0], (int) result->ne[1]);
    for (int j = 0; j < result->ne[1] /* rows */; j++) {
        if (j > 0) {
            printf("\n");
        }

        for (int i = 0; i < result->ne[0] /* cols */; i++) {
            printf(" %.2f", result_data[j * result->ne[0] + i]);
        }
    }
    printf(" ]\n");

    // 11. Free memory and exit
    delete[] result_data;
    ggml_free(ctx_cgraph);
    ggml_gallocr_free(allocr);
    ggml_free(ctx);
    ggml_backend_buffer_free(buffer);
    ggml_backend_free(backend);
    return 0;
}
```

Compile and run it, you should get the same result as the last example:

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target demo

# Run it
./build/bin/demo
```

Expected result:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

## Printing the computational graph

> When working with a bigger cgraph, you can print out the graph for debugging.

Reviewer 2: It'd be great to add a short line about `cgraph` again here, would be a good refresher of concepts.

Author: Added on https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/4f58c89c453025dc3874c16df0772467e4ec6fe4

You can add `ggml_graph_print` to do that:

```cpp
...

// Mark the "result" tensor to be computed
ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result0);

// Print the cgraph
ggml_graph_print(gf);
```

Run it:

```
=== GRAPH ===
n_nodes = 1
 -   0: [     4,     3,     1]          MUL_MAT  
n_leafs = 2
 -   0: [     2,     4]     NONE           leaf_0
 -   1: [     2,     3]     NONE           leaf_1
========================================
```

Additionally, you can draw the cgraph as graphviz dot format:

```cpp
ggml_graph_dump_dot(gf, NULL, "debug.dot");
```

You can use the `dot` command or this [online website](https://dreampuf.github.io/GraphvizOnline) to render `debug.dot` into a final image:

![ggml-debug](assets/introduction-to-ggml/ggml-debug.svg)

## Conclusion

In this introductory post, we've covered the basics of ggml, including its key concepts, a simple example, and how to work with backends. This foundation should give you a good starting point for working with ggml in your projects.

> In upcoming posts, we'll dive deeper into more advanced topics such as GGUF format, working with different backends, and implementing more complex models using ggml. Stay tuned for more in-depth explorations of this powerful library!

Reviewer 2: I'd recommend adding a next steps/ future exploration column, you can recommend people to checkout other examples: https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/tree/master/examples

and some other reads as well.

Author: Yeah thanks. I re-wrote the conclusion on https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/22ce11e179b8861f0ff1cb8df943469c0e218d61 to clarity this part

Reviewer 2: Looks good! great!

To get started, let's create a new directory `examples/demo`

```sh
cd ggml # make sure you're in the project root

# create cpp and CMakeLists file
touch examples/demo/demo.cpp
touch examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt
```

The code for this example is based on [simple-ctx.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/6c71d5a071d842118fb04c03c4b15116dff09621/examples/simple/simple-ctx.cpp)

Edit `examples/demo/demo.cpp` with the content below:

```cpp
#include "ggml.h"
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    // initialize data of matrices to perform matrix multiplication
    const int rows_A = 4, cols_A = 2;
    float matrix_A[rows_A * cols_A] = {
        2, 8,
        5, 1,
        4, 2,
        8, 6
    };
    const int rows_B = 3, cols_B = 2;
    float matrix_B[rows_B * cols_B] = {
        10, 5,
        9, 9,
        5, 4
    };

    // 1. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor data
    // Calculate the size needed to allocate
    size_t ctx_size = 0;
    ctx_size += rows_A * cols_A * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor a
    ctx_size += rows_B * cols_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor b

>     ctx_size += 2 * ggml_tensor_overhead(), // tensors

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ctx_size += 2 * ggml_tensor_overhead(); // tensors
```

>     ctx_size += rows_A * cols_A * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor a
>     ctx_size += rows_B * cols_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor b
>     ctx_size += 2 * ggml_tensor_overhead(), // tensors
>     ctx_size += ggml_graph_overhead(); // compute graph
>     ctx_size += 1024; // some overhead
> 

Reviewer 3: Adding arbitrary overhead is a bad practice. I think changing the number of tensor overheads from 2 to 3 (2 input + 1 output) should work:

```suggestion
    ctx_size += rows_A * cols_A * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor a
    ctx_size += rows_B * cols_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor b
    ctx_size += 3 * ggml_tensor_overhead(), // tensors
    ctx_size += ggml_graph_overhead(); // compute graph

```

Haven't tested this, so make sure it runs correctly with this change

Reviewer 4: If you want to calculate the exact memory requirement, you could use `GGML_PAD(rows_A * cols_A * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32), GGML_MEM_ALIGN)` to account for the padding. It would be easier to use `ggml_backend_alloc_ctx_tensors_from_buft` to allocate the buffers, though. It can be used separately from the rest of ggml-backend.

Reviewer 3: To clarify, the 2->3 change is due to the `result` tensor, not to replace the extra overhead

Author: @slaren Interestingly, I tried this but it still doesn't have enough memory:

```cpp
size_t ctx_size = 0;
ctx_size += GGML_PAD(rows_A * cols_A * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32), GGML_MEM_ALIGN); // tensor a
ctx_size += GGML_PAD(rows_B * cols_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32), GGML_MEM_ALIGN); // tensor b
ctx_size += GGML_PAD(rows_A * rows_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32), GGML_MEM_ALIGN); // tensor result
ctx_size += 3 * ggml_tensor_overhead(); // metadata for 3 tensors
ctx_size += ggml_graph_overhead(); // compute graph
```

But adding an extra 32 bytes overhead and it works: `ctx_size += 32;`

However, for simplification, I will leave out `GGML_PAD` here and stick with 1024 bytes of overhead. This version is tested & confirmed to be working: https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/f064396dcb67883e6c67dff362d455ebf0ea309e

Reviewer 4: The missing 32 bytes may be the memory allocated by `ggml_graph_compute_with_ctx`. I agree that it is better to leave it out, it adds too much complexity.

Reviewer: Maybe change the comment in that case to something like `// some overhead (exact calculation omitted for simplicity)` to not make it look like it's common practice.

Author: yes that sounds good. I added the command in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/4a4b95c07fed5672d54f0b6b3f91717acbdf0a2a

When doing a computation or inference with backend, common steps that need to be done are:
1. Initialize `ggml_backend`
2. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor metadata (we **don't need** to allocate tensor data right away)
3. Create tensors metadata (only their shapes and data types)
4. Allocate a `ggml_backend_buffer` to store all tensors
5. Copy tensor data from main memory (RAM) to backend buffer
6. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation
7. Create a `ggml_gallocr` for cgraph allocation
8. Optionally: schedule the cgraph using `ggml_backend_sched`
9. Run the computation
10. Retrieve results (output tensors)
11. Free memory and exit

The code for this example is based on [simple-backend.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/6c71d5a071d842118fb04c03c4b15116dff09621/examples/simple/simple-backend.cpp)

```cpp

> #include "ggml.h"
> #include "ggml-alloc.h"
> #include "ggml-backend.h"

Reviewer 4: In order to use this example with CUDA, it would be necessary to include `ggml-cuda.h` as well.
```suggestion
#include "ggml.h"
#include "ggml-alloc.h"
#include "ggml-backend.h"
#ifdef GGML_USE_CUDA
#include "ggml-cuda.h"
#endif
```

- [ggml_cgraph](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/include/ggml.h#L652): Represents a computational graph. Think of it as the "order of computation" that will be transferred to the backend.
- [ggml_backend](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L80): Represents an interface for executing computation graphs. There are many types of backends: CPU (default), CUDA, Metal (Apple Silicon), Vulkan, RPC, etc.
- [ggml_backend_buffer_type](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L18): Represents a buffer type. Think of it as a "memory allocator" connected to each `ggml_backend`. For example, if you want to perform calculations on a GPU, you need to allocate memory on the GPU via `buffer_type` (usually abbreviated as `buft`).
- [ggml_backend_buffer](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend-impl.h#L52): Represents a buffer allocated by `buffer_type`. Remember: a buffer can hold the data of multiple tensors.

> - [ggml_gallocr](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-alloc.c#L354): Represents a memory allocator, used by `ggml_cgraph` to dynamically allocate memory for computation.

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

> - [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend.c#L1048): A backend scheduler that allows using multiple backends simultaneously. For example, if a model is too large, some tensors and operations can be processed on the GPU, while others can be handled by the CPU. This is also useful when working with multiple GPUs.

Author: Yup that makes sense. I changed these links to header file in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

> - [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend.c#L1048): A backend scheduler that allows using multiple backends simultaneously. For example, if a model is too large, some tensors and operations can be processed on the GPU, while others can be handled by the CPU. This is also useful when working with multiple GPUs.

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

- [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/include/ggml-backend.h#L169): A scheduler that enables concurrent use of multiple backends. It can distribute computations across different hardware (e.g., GPU and CPU) when dealing with large models or multiple GPUs. The scheduler can also automatically assign GPU-unsupported operations to the CPU, ensuring optimal resource utilization and compatibility.

> - [ggml_backend_sched](https://github.com/ggerganov/ggml/blob/18703ad600cc68dbdb04d57434c876989a841d12/src/ggml-backend.c#L1048): A backend scheduler that allows using multiple backends simultaneously. For example, if a model is too large, some tensors and operations can be processed on the GPU, while others can be handled by the CPU. This is also useful when working with multiple GPUs.

Reviewer 4: Some of the types still link to `ggml-backend-impl.h`, which is a private header. Instead, these should link to `ggml-backend.h`, which is where the public interface is defined.

    ctx_size += rows_B * cols_B * ggml_type_size(GGML_TYPE_F32); // tensor b
    ctx_size += 2 * ggml_tensor_overhead(), // tensors
    ctx_size += ggml_graph_overhead(); // compute graph
    ctx_size += 1024; // some overhead

    // Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor data
    struct ggml_init_params params = {
        /*.mem_size   =*/ ctx_size,
        /*.mem_buffer =*/ NULL,
        /*.no_alloc   =*/ false,
    };
    struct ggml_context * ctx = ggml_init(params);

    // 2. Create tensors and set data
    struct ggml_tensor * tensor_a = ggml_new_tensor_2d(ctx, GGML_TYPE_F32, cols_A, rows_A);
    struct ggml_tensor * tensor_b = ggml_new_tensor_2d(ctx, GGML_TYPE_F32, cols_B, rows_B);
    memcpy(tensor_a->data, matrix_A, ggml_nbytes(tensor_a));
    memcpy(tensor_b->data, matrix_B, ggml_nbytes(tensor_b));

    // 3. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation
    struct ggml_cgraph * gf = ggml_new_graph(ctx);

    // result = a*b^T
    // Pay attention: ggml_mul_mat(A, B) ==> B will be transposed internally
    // the result is transposed
    struct ggml_tensor * result = ggml_mul_mat(ctx, tensor_a, tensor_b);

    // Mark the "result" tensor to be computed

>     ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result);

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

>     ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result);

Reviewer 4: There are two more uses of `ggml_build_forward_expand` in lines 186 and 420 that should also be updated.

    ggml_graph_compute_with_ctx(ctx, gf, n_threads);

    // 5. Retrieve results (output tensors)
    float * result_data = (float *) result->data;
    printf("mul mat (%d x %d) (transposed result):\n[", (int) result->ne[0], (int) result->ne[1]);
    for (int j = 0; j < result->ne[1] /* rows */; j++) {
        if (j > 0) {
            printf("\n");
        }

        for (int i = 0; i < result->ne[0] /* cols */; i++) {
            printf(" %.2f", result_data[j * result->ne[0] + i]);
        }
    }
    printf(" ]\n");

    // 6. Free memory and exit
    ggml_free(ctx);
    return 0;
}
```

Write these lines in the `examples/demo/CMakeLists.txt` file you created:

```
set(TEST_TARGET demo)
add_executable(${TEST_TARGET} demo)
target_link_libraries(${TEST_TARGET} PRIVATE ggml)
```

Edit `examples/CMakeLists.txt`, add this line at the end:

```
add_subdirectory(demo)
```

Compile and run it:

```sh
cmake -B build
cmake --build build --config Release --target demo

# Run it
./build/bin/demo
```

Expected result:

```
mul mat (4 x 3) (transposed result):
[ 60.00 55.00 50.00 110.00
 90.00 54.00 54.00 126.00
 42.00 29.00 28.00 64.00 ]
```

## Example with a backend

> "Backend" in ggml refers to a device that can handle tensor operations. Backend can be CPU, CUDA, Vulkan, etc.

Reviewer 3: I think "interface" instead of "device" is better, because CUDA, Vulkan, etc. are note technically devices. Though there might be a something better than "interface" too

```suggestion
"Backend" in ggml refers to an interface that can handle tensor operations. Backend can be CPU, CUDA, Vulkan, etc.
```

In reality, most programs using ggml will store tensors in a backend, even if the backend is CPU. The advantages of this approach are:
- Developer can re-use the same code for other backend. For example, if the code works with CPU, then you can run it on GPU.

> - Tensors for result and intermediate operations are allocated automatically.

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

When doing a computation or inference with backend, common steps that need to be done are:
1. Initialize `ggml_backend`
2. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor metadata (we **don't need** to allocate tensor data right away)
3. Create tensors metadata (only their shapes and data types)
4. Allocate a `ggml_backend_buffer` to store all tensors
5. Copy tensor data from main memory (RAM) to backend buffer
6. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation

> 7. Create a `ggml_gallocr` for cgraph computation

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

        struct ggml_init_params params0 = {
            /*.mem_size   =*/ ggml_tensor_overhead()*GGML_DEFAULT_GRAPH_SIZE + ggml_graph_overhead(),
            /*.mem_buffer =*/ NULL,
            /*.no_alloc   =*/ true, // the tensors will be allocated later by ggml_allocr_alloc_graph()
        };
        ctx_cgraph = ggml_init(params0);
        gf = ggml_new_graph(ctx_cgraph);

        // result = a*b^T
        // Pay attention: ggml_mul_mat(A, B) ==> B will be transposed internally
        // the result is transposed
        struct ggml_tensor * result0 = ggml_mul_mat(ctx_cgraph, tensor_a, tensor_b);

        // Mark the "result" tensor to be computed
        ggml_build_forward_expand(gf, result0);
    }

    // 7. Create a `ggml_gallocr` for cgraph computation
    ggml_gallocr_t allocr = ggml_gallocr_new(ggml_backend_get_default_buffer_type(backend));

    // (we skip step 8. Optionally: schedule the cgraph using `ggml_backend_sched`)

    // 9. Run the computation
    int n_threads = 1; // Optional: number of threads to perform some operations with multi-threading
    if (ggml_backend_is_cpu(backend)) {
        ggml_backend_cpu_set_n_threads(backend, n_threads);
    }

>     ggml_gallocr_alloc_graph(allocr, gf);

Author: Changed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2279/commits/0cc8ac8257d478a1017fc23bbfd60f926ddab642

## Simple example

In this example, we'll go through the steps to replicate the code we ran in [Getting Started](#getting-started). We need to create 2 matrices, multiply them and get the result. Using PyTorch, the code looks like this:

```py
import torch

# Create two matrices
matrix1 = torch.tensor([
  [2, 8],
  [5, 1],
  [4, 2],
  [8, 6],
])
matrix2 = torch.tensor([
  [10, 5],
  [9, 9],
  [5, 4],
])

# Perform matrix multiplication
result = torch.matmul(matrix1, matrix2.T)
print(result.T)
```

With ggml, the following steps must be done to achieve the same result:
1. Allocate `ggml_context` to store tensor data
2. Create tensors and set data
3. Create a `ggml_cgraph` for mul_mat operation
4. Run the computation
5. Retrieve results (output tensors)
6. Free memory and exit

**NOTE**: In this example, we will allocate the tensor data **inside** the `ggml_context` for simplicity. In practice, memory should be allocated as a device buffer, as we'll see in the next section.

To get started, let's create a new directory `examples/demo`

```sh
cd ggml # make sure you're in the project root

> # create cpp and CMakeLists file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# create c source and CMakeLists file
```
